the
world since its Inception in the
aftermath of World War II the United
Nations has been a pivotal Force
conducting humanitarian operations
worldwide aiming to ease the suffering
of civilians caught up in conflict or
disaster through its agencies the UN
provides emergency relief and health
care services and offers protection to
those trapped in war
zones in doing so sometimes the mission
itself comes under threat a case in
point is Israel's war on
Gaza more than 9 weeks into Israel's
military offensive un officials have
warned that the conditions for staff to
deliver humanitarian Aid are
increasingly precarious the UN Agency
for Palestinian refugees estimates
Israeli attacks and evacuation orders
have forcibly displaced 85% of the
population many of them 1.3 million are
Sheltering in un facilities more than
four times their normal capacity and
Israel frequently targets those
facilities hampering their operational
capabilities the killing of humanitarian
workers adds another layer of complexity
to the crisis it begs the question can
the United Nations overcome these
challenges to fulfill its mission in
Gaza for some crucial Insight on this
Martin griffi the UN under Secretary
General for humanit Affairs an emergency
relief coordinator talks to Al
jazer Martin Griffith the UN under
Secretary General for humanitarian
Affairs thank you for talking to Al
jazer you've had a long career with the
United Nations your job is to coordinate
all the un's humanitarian work all the
UN agencies that are operating in the
field with your experience have you seen
something as bad as Gaza no I've had 50
years James
50 years of dealing with conflict and I
started in
1972 uh with um the karou I was in the
IND China war remember those days and
that was bad that was bad you remember
the Killing
Fields um but Gaza
somehow is
worse not necessarily in the amount of
suffering each individual has but in the
lack of prospect
because Gaza
uniquely uh does not allow people to
flee and we know that Sudan has had what
two million people left Sudan for safety
elsewhere not a great story for them but
alive um but the problem for Gaza is
that for so many people in Gaza the
future is completely obscure so in some
way Gaza is uniquely awful and that's
before you start talking about the
suffering the numbers the the Betrayal
of the health system and so on Gaza is
special and it's special in a bad way
you've already said it's no longer
possible to say there's a humanitarian
operation in Gaza explain that what I
mean by that is that we had hoped that
when the
war moved South we were in fact told
that there when the war moved South that
there would be a different approach to
the military operation slightly more
targeted perhaps precise and surgical
are the cliches that are used as you
know and we had a 10-point plan which we
presented to the world as to how we
would respond to
it what's happened is that the assault
on Southern Gaza has been no less than
the North it's raging of course through
conun at the moment it's threatening
rougher the compression of the
population is greater we cannot uh be
sure of any of our points of operation
to be safe through deconfliction through
this process whereby you tell each side
that this is a safe place for un
operations or humanitarian operations we
don't have that so we operate on a form
of humanitarian opportunism it's
not what is the characteristic of a norm
humanitarian operation which is
dependability reliability repetition you
know in the next one's coming and a
certain amount of safety both for Aid
workers and for those who they
serve those conditions don't exist in
southern
Gaza and they and the fact that they
don't means that the humanitarian
operation which can be improved by the
way is a random
one there are trucks going into to Rafa
they are unloaded with great difficulty
and bravery from the people who have to
come from where the war is down to to to
this these
spots Aid does get to people from time
to
time there is some Aid going to some
hospitals but it is random it is not
dependable and in my mind that's not a
humanitarian operation because a
humanitarian operation is a safety net
for people in war given the scale of the
destruction we've seen the amount of
homes that have been destroyed is it
fair to say Gaza is now completely
unlivable I think Gaza may become
completely
unlivable Gaza is already a place where
there is no guaranteed place of safety
which could be one Criterion for
livability we still don't know where
this will end we worry of course about
whether the compression of the
population down south and South and
South is going to have them burst out
of the borders of Gaza into new problems
into
Egypt so we don't know but what we do
know is that the north of Gaza is barely
livable and if we see that replicated in
the South and I understand from the what
I read and what I'm told is that
Hamas um which the acts of which on
October the 7th started this awful
conflict through their appalling acts is
also very present in the South always
has been in fact in some sense is more
than in the north so we can
assume that it is very difficult to
eradicate a terrorist group like Hamas
with precise surgical
operations it more it is more likely to
be a mass military operation of the kind
we see that
creates an environment a
landscape which is unlivable in but the
worst aspect of it I think is that um
we've had many many many negotiations
daily with the Israelis on all these
matters um is that people are asked to
move to places which they are then
defined as unsafe again and they have to
move again now normally in most
conflicts that you and I know from
around the world you're asked to move to
a place out of the conflict to a place
of Greater safety
that's why people can't trust these um I
think probably well-meaning
um pieces of information to say get out
of the way of the fighting which is a
good thing in itself it's a good thing
but not if it means that you go
somewhere else and maybe you get bombed
on the way and then when you get
somewhere else you have to go somewhere
else further your your boss the
Secretary General Antonio ceras said
people are being treated like human
pinballs yes the place that now Israel
is saying to go to um one of those
designated safe areas is a place called
almasi which is a desolate bit of land
by the coast where there are no
facilities whatsoever do you believe
that is a safe Zone the you recognized
no we don't and we're very firm on this
and we have been from the outset when
there was a dis discussion about safe
Zone started in the gazen context a
couple of weeks ago um with quite a lot
of pressure being put on the un for
example to recognize the safe Zone
suggestions from Israel and others um
now the UN has a special history as you
know on safe zones we have lived through
shanit which was not a safe Zone as it
turned out the requirements of a safe
zone are quite clear it includes the
need for guarantees of safety from all
parties it needs to be a place that
people go to and leave voluntarily it
needs to be a place where humanitarian
services are regularly and reliably
provided and mamasi doesn't fit any of
those requirements as far as we're aware
and so we have had a continuing
discussion with the Israeli authorities
about what is a safe Zone and what is a
safe area one of the worries that we
have about um
masasi is that these very well meaning
and well-founded suggestions for a
maritime Corridor May draw people down
to that Beach area which we don't think
is safe where there will be a collection
of people who will be In Harm's Way and
so they will be drawn by the possibility
of humanitarian Aid so the United
Nations the United Nations Secretary
General has been extremely clear and we
have published statements and signed
statements by all the humanitarian
agencies to say we do not believe
that the concept of safe zones exists in
all possibility in Gaza yes and places
flying the UN flag and I assume you've
given the coordinates of those places to
the Israelis my understanding more than
90 of those places have been hit in some
ways by the Israelis um isn't this
Israel showing a willful disregard of
the neutrality of the UN well it's it's
it's it's a it's a it's a appalling
situation we had our own my own staff
who live mostly in one building in
Gaza that building was rocketed which
had just un stuff and the other they
knew that was a building with un stuff
it was it was part of the deconfliction
operation and presumably they must have
felt that there were Hamas operatives
nearby or underneath
orever um so the process of
deconfliction this is another reason why
my 10-point planners in
tatters is because we haven't been able
to trust the confliction and on top of
that you've had more than 130 staff
working for the UN most of them working
for the UN agency that deals with
Palestinians unra who've been killed
well Israel says it's minimizing
civilian casualties and it's managed to
kill more than 130 un staff that just
doesn't make sense their claims to be
minimizing casualties does it well you
know it's the most as as I know you've
heard this before but it's the most the
highest number of of humanitarian staff
un staff killed in any conflict in the
many many years of the UN
history the other big pernicious
pandemic I think of um the lack of
principle is the targeting of Health
Centers and health institutions and
Clinics and hospitals it's it's a breach
of international humanitarian law and Dr
Tedros has spoken out very clearly about
this and I think he has said recently
that only what is it 14 out of 36
hospitals operate and that minimally and
that
minimally um now look it is also against
humanitarian law to use the premises of
a hospital or a school anywhere
protected by the law as a place for
military operations so if there are
Hamas infesting parts of those hospitals
or schools then they are breaking
humanitarian law but then you have these
principles of proportionality and and so
forth and we haven't seen that happen
the numbers of dead in Gaza children of
course in particular being the most
tragic
statistic far outweigh the numbers
killed in other conflicts of the day now
there's something as the Secretary
General said there's something
completely wrong which is a nice way of
putting it about this yes one can
understand and indeed defend the notion
that Israel has a right to respond to
the terrible events of October 7th and
I'm one of those who has seen the
compilation videos of those terrible
acts of those days but it doesn't
justify for a second the impact on the
innocent civilians of Gaza so do you
think they're going to get pushed out of
Gaza I don't know because the Secretary
General your boss said in the security
Council the situation at the moment
creates increased pressure for Mass
displacement into Egypt and some are
saying that was the I mean the
Palestinian Ambassador in the UN as well
in the same meeting said that's Israel's
plan in his view well I wish I knew I
wish I knew what the plan was it's the
absence of knowing what the plan is that
also by the way in Gaza as in as
elsewhere makes humanitarian plan
difficult because so they're not telling
you what they're planning to do with
Gaza after the war is no over I mean
you're one of the top un officials
you're supposed to deal with the
humanitarian situation neither Israel or
the US is telling you what the what the
plan is no what we're having with them
and it is a good thing and it should be
recognized is daily negotiations with
the Israelis the US Egypt and my office
the UN
daily negotiations which are well
attended which are
serious which
are detailed to try to improve for
example the logistics of entry into
Gaza but they're not a forer for us to
be told this is what's going to happen
at the end of the war the whole question
about the day after the whole question
about an administration of what will
Gaza look like is something that is
completely absent what I'm struck by is
not so much that I'm not told I don't
expect to be told I expect to be there
to
react but what the world should be
hearing more of is what the Civil
Society of the Palestinian people who
still exist as a people not just in Gaza
but elsewhere in their camps around the
region in the West Bank what do they
think what is their answer to that basic
question about how should Palestine be
administered not to question the
two-state
solution but to talk about the first
step towards where how to get there and
that's missing we have very
very um energetic and welcome diplomacy
from the Arab region they've been round
the West as you know Washington a couple
of days ago talking about the needs of
the Palestinian people we've had
excellent discussions here in the Doha
Forum about that one of the main points
that the prime minister of the
Palestinian Authority made was why
aren't we asking the Palestinian people
what they want to
see and of course their ideas will be uh
confused in many ways their views about
starting a political process will be
over ambitious No Doubt
their voice just as in Sudan the
civilian voice the Civil Society the
civilian voice The Voice equally also by
the way of Hamas and other
organizations um who've been involved in
the
Palestinian um or um Universe needs to
be heard we need them to be given the
opportunity to tell us their views about
the future I'm a stranger I get no vote
in
Palestine but there are many who do and
they have strong views much better
informed than mine and in the world Gaza
is perhaps overshadowing some of the
other conflicts for example you
mentioned it briefly earlier on oh uh
the situation in Sudan where two rival
generals continue their battle how would
you describe the situation there now
it's very very bad I think
Sudan it is it is one of the tragedies
of Gaza or Sudan that Gaza has taken all
our attention I mean you remember
Ukraine there was a war going on there
um and I'm sure it's still going um
Sudan I think in many ways is a greater
threat to International Peace and
Security in a certain way the difference
between Sudan and Gaza is Gaza is a jail
Sudan people run out and indeed
undermine the neighboring countries as
we know but Sudan is falling
apart um the Arab ability to reach
people in Sudan and once again we're
very underfunded maybe 30% funded for
Sudan our access is very difficult icrc
has had a convoy which was attacked even
after an agreement between those two
generals for it to go through and people
killed on that Convoy Sudan is a place
of broken promises we put a lot of
effort as did the United States and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia into a renewal
of the jeda process as you know where we
AA the United Nations was going to
manage negotiations on access between
the parties and I think it lasted what
about a week before it ended and
political diplomacy on
Sudan is completely
absent and that's just the beginning of
the problem Sudan because it's
consequences as you know through
Africa it's consequen is to our sense of
values is so catastrophic a
distinguished actually he was a Catholic
the head of sant jido which is a
Catholic lay Community which has been
involved in conflict resolution for many
years said to me the other day he said
what is striking today and Sudan is the
place I think where we see it most
clearly is that we used to believe in
the values of Peace as our preferred
option stability peace dialogue all that
stuff that we've all been busy with for
so many years we've rediscovered the
virtues of War as the option of
choice and when we saw Sudan start again
between those two generals it was
essentially them deciding I think I can
make a better deal out of a war than I
can out of an alliance and an agreement
a dialogue and eventually remember a a
government um screwed together together
between
them and the same has happened in Gaza
and the same of course has happened in
Ukraine the the world now suffers
principally I think it's not so much a
collapse in multilateralism and its
values although that is difficult it's
not so much a collapse in the Divinity
of the security Council although that
has been a disappointment it's worse
than that is that war is not the default
option anymore it's a credible useful
instrument in certain cases according to
certain people finally you mentioned
Sudan your operations there are
underfunded you've come up with your
plans for 2024 your Global humanitarian
overview you project that 181 million
people in 71 countries will need
assistance it's going to cost $46
billion to pay for it but if you look at
this year you're not going to get any of
that money or a large part of that money
are you no the the what I I want to make
two points about that because it's it's
a big deal we just launched it here in
Doha $46 billion is a lot of money it's
10 billion doar less than we asked for
this year so the first thing is that we
have cramped our style we have limited
our Ambitions we the humanitarian
agencies in countries to focus on
absolute life saving activities the most
important ones so we' reduced the budget
in response to the fact that the funding
Gap is is widening but we're still
asking for twice what we're getting this
year so what does that tell us that
tells us a number of things number one
we need to do much more on making money
work better and I think there's two
things I'd like to mention there number
one use of cash use of cash as a a as a
humanitarian methodology gives agency to
the people it it is given to and they
spend it always more wisely than we
would number two listen to them listen
to them a lot more listen to the
communities because they'll tell you no
I don't want another tent thank you I'd
prefer to have a road whatever money
better spent number
three go for
economics isn't it interesting that in
Afghanistan one of the things that is
more talked about than humanitarian Aid
at the moment in a place which is so IGN
another one of the places that explored
it's the economics of Afghanistan that
have become an area of possibility it is
the economics of Syria which is driving
it into the ground it is the economics
of Myanmar as well as the the war which
is driving it towards Misery the
humanitarian Community next year 2024
with ambitions as it has it's not only
about linking up with development
organizations and making sure that we do
not do it through high level panels in
places like New York but we do it on the
ground with the communities sitting
together it's not just that it's about
looking at the economics of how people
live and making economics and economic
interventions more acceptable
politically to donors more useful and
tactical to those who need them you know
women are four times more productive in
Afghanistan when employed
than
men if you if you want to help women in
Afghanistan and we all do of course we
want their education and we of course we
want them to be able to work but we can
also do it through investment in
economics so I want my community to be
focused on a partnership with local
communities first and then a partnership
with the others with the economists with
the World Bank with the private sector
with development organizations because
if we don't change our business model we
were going to have another year of a
major Gap in which we will be what 30%
funded and there's going to come that
moment when people will be saying what
happened to the other
70% what what what happened last year
are they alive or dead or were you
fooling us and we have because of that
kind of question we've limited we've
focused we've narrowed our desire down
but we need to supplement that with
genuine Partnerships which are not about
patronage and it's not about I'll hand
this on to you later we'll work at the
same time together that's what we need
to do now that means a revolution in the
business model of the humanitarian
community and we're trying to do that at
a time of as we've been discussing some
of the greatest and most intractable
conflicts and by the way climate is
going to hit us again worse next year
even than this year Martin griffi under
Secretary General for the United Nations
for humanitarian Affairs thank you for
talking to alazur thanks a lot James
very good to see you thank
you